README.md, before:

# functional and ecological determinants of evolutionary dynamics in crAss-like phages

contains bash scripts for 
* running annotation pipeline 
* main pipeline: determining selective pressure and micro diversity for genes
** metagenomic read mapping 
** data analysis

NB: when in doubt, consider using subversion commit history with commit messages part of the documentation

## examples ##
Accompanying Python scripts are here:
https://github.com/resharp/phages


## annotation pipeline ##

NB: scripts in annotation pipeline are run individually for maximum control and flexibility

-	Guerin_to_ref.sh
	-	split Guerin.fna in different fasta files in different subdirectories for all reference genomes
	-	predict genes and proteins on reference genomes with prodigal
-	Yutin_to_hmm.sh
	-	download alignments
	-	build HMM profiles for gene families
	-	create protein file for genus 1 from GenBank file
	-	search all reference genomes with HMM profiles, outputs:
		-	ref_genes.tsv
		-	hmm_hits.tsv
	-	run a blastp search of all proteins against all proteins
-	run_ref_against_pvog_hmm.sh
	-	run HMM search on all genes against HMM profiles in pVOG database (Grazziotin 2017, date accessed 14/1/2020)
-	folder hmm_hits
	-	hmm_hits.tsv
		-	results of hmm hits on correct gene annotation for genomes with different genetic code
	-	ref_genes.csv
		-	result of new gene predictions with correct translation table for two reference genomes
	-	pvogs_annotations.tsv
		-	pvogs annotations (by Nikos Pappas) from pVOG database (Grazziotin 2017, date accessed 14/1/2020)
	-	all_refs_pvog_table.txt	
		-	all pvog hits against ref genome genes
	- 	pairwise_blastout_filtered.txt
-	folder ref_seqs
	-	ids_ref_genomes.txt
		-	ref genomes that are used by run_pipeline_on_project.sh
		-	contains mapping from name reference genome to genus
	-	crassphage.gbk
		- original gbk file and results from create_proteins_from_gbk added.
	-	crassphage_refseq.fasta
		reference sequence
	-	crassphage_refseq_codingregions.txt
		-	coding regions for crassphage_refseq (used as input for DiversiTools)
	-	crassphage_refseq_gene_list.txt
		-	annotation outline output
	-	IDEM for all other reference sequences

## main pipeline: determining selective pressure and micro diversity for genes ##

## metagenomic read mapping ##
Main pipeline (ran for 3 weeks on 800 files) preparing for data analysis.

-	run_adapter_removal.sh
	-	Adapter removal and quality filtering of the paired-end fastq files was done with AdapterRemoval v2
-	run_pipeline_on_project.sh
	-	run_all_samples
		-	main pipeline, ran for three weeks for 800 samples!
		-	executes metagenomic read mapping, DiversiTools and CalcDiversiMeasures.py

temporary
-	run_pipeline_untrimmed
	-	used to determine if results differ for trimmed or untrimmed files

## data analysis pipeline ##

Wrappers/examples for MakeGenePlots.py, CalcDiversiMeasures.py and CalcCodonMeasures.py
Runs in the order of minutes!

-	data_analysis.sh
	-	run_all_codon_measures
	-	run_all_gene_plots
        -	analysis for one reference genome (individual gene analysis)
	-	run_family_gene_plots
		-	analysis for gene families based on multiple ref genomes
	-	sample_stats
		-	collect sample/genome mapping statistics produced by samtools idxstats
		-	output: sample_stats.txt (input file for MakeSamplePlots.py

## obsolete code used for pilot
Samples were selected from a local database MGXDB
-	run_crassphage_samples.sh
-	run_diversitools.sh


# old scripts of the phage clustering pipeline internship Bas Dutilh



## extracting phages ##
Phages were extracted using VirSorter from a selection of 34590 bacterial genomes from PATRIC.
https://www.patricbrc.org/

Use the script run_parallel_vs.sh to start 24 jobs of run_vs_1.sh in parallel distributed over two servers.
run_vs_1.sh uses the VirSorter Perl script and is set up in a Conda environment provided by VirSorter.

See
https://github.com/simroux/VirSorter

job_puller, ana_iterations and show_virsorter_summary are old script files, for running on concatenated PATRIC genomes.


## gene annotation ##

* We use prodigal for prediction of genes
* We do a pairwise blastp search of all genes against all genes with evalue cut-off 1e-3
* We filter out all pairwise matches with a > 75% query and target coverage
* we did _not_ filter on bitscore (compare vCONTact bitscore > 50)


## protein clustering ##
* We use mcl for clustering the genes based on the filtered pairwise blastp matches without weight on the edges
* mcl with inflation factor 2.0
* we evaluate the protein clusters by building a hmm profile for every gene cluster and see how well it separates the proteins (todo: specify)
* mafft for multiple alignment of proteins
* hmmbuild for building hmm profile
* hmmsearch

## clustering phages ##
* we cluster on shared gene content

Commit message:

improve README with summary and dependencies

README.md, after:

# functional and ecological determinants of evolutionary dynamics in crAss-like phages

the mgx folder contains bash scripts for 
* running annotation pipeline 
* main pipeline: determining selective pressure and micro diversity for genes
	* metagenomic read mapping 
	* data analysis

tip: consider using subversion commit messages as part of the documentation

## Summary
This pipeline calculates selective pressure and micro diversity measures of genes of reference genomes. Variation of genes is found by mapping metagenomic reads of samples against these reference genomes. Reference genomes, paired-end fastq files of samples and gene annotation information should be provided. This project also contains a specific gene annotation pipeline, which can be replaced by any other method.
The main pipeline uses DiversiTools to calculate measures on codon level, which are then further aggregated on gene and gene family level.

## dependencies

Accompanying Python scripts are here:
https://github.com/resharp/phages (to be installed in source/phages directory)

- conda, python37
- AdapterRemoval v2, samtools, bwa mem
- DiversiTools (http://josephhughes.github.io/DiversiTools)
- hmmsearch, hmmbuild, blastp, makeblastdb, seqtk, prodigal

to do 
- all Conda dependencies (refer to generated file by Conda?)

## annotation pipeline ##

NB: scripts in annotation pipeline are run individually for maximum control and flexibility

-	Guerin_to_ref.sh
	-	split Guerin.fna in different fasta files in different subdirectories for all reference genomes
	-	predict genes and proteins on reference genomes with prodigal
-	Yutin_to_hmm.sh
	-	download alignments
	-	build HMM profiles for gene families
	-	create protein file for genus 1 from GenBank file
	-	search all reference genomes with HMM profiles, outputs:
		-	ref_genes.tsv
		-	hmm_hits.tsv
	-	run a blastp search of all proteins against all proteins
-	run_ref_against_pvog_hmm.sh
	-	run HMM search on all genes against HMM profiles in pVOG database (Grazziotin 2017, date accessed 14/1/2020)
-	folder hmm_hits
	-	hmm_hits.tsv
		-	results of hmm hits on correct gene annotation for genomes with different genetic code
	-	ref_genes.csv
		-	result of new gene predictions with correct translation table for two reference genomes
	-	pvogs_annotations.tsv
		-	pvogs annotations (by Nikos Pappas) from pVOG database (Grazziotin 2017, date accessed 14/1/2020)
	-	all_refs_pvog_table.txt	
		-	all pvog hits against ref genome genes
	- 	pairwise_blastout_filtered.txt
-	folder ref_seqs
	-	ids_ref_genomes.txt
		-	ref genomes that are used by run_pipeline_on_project.sh
		-	contains mapping from name reference genome to genus
	-	crassphage.gbk
		- original gbk file and results from create_proteins_from_gbk added.
	-	crassphage_refseq.fasta
		reference sequence
	-	crassphage_refseq_codingregions.txt
		-	coding regions for crassphage_refseq (used as input for DiversiTools)
	-	crassphage_refseq_gene_list.txt
		-	annotation outline output
	-	IDEM for all other reference sequences

## main pipeline: determining selective pressure and micro diversity for genes ##

## metagenomic read mapping ##
Main pipeline (ran for 3 weeks on 800 files) preparing for data analysis.

-	run_adapter_removal.sh
	-	Adapter removal and quality filtering of the paired-end fastq files was done with AdapterRemoval v2
-	run_pipeline_on_project.sh
	-	run_all_samples
		-	main pipeline, ran for three weeks for 800 samples!
		-	executes metagenomic read mapping, DiversiTools and CalcDiversiMeasures.py

temporary
-	run_pipeline_untrimmed
	-	used to determine if results differ for trimmed or untrimmed files

## data analysis pipeline ##

Wrappers/examples for MakeGenePlots.py, CalcDiversiMeasures.py and CalcCodonMeasures.py
Runs in the order of minutes!

-	data_analysis.sh
	-	run_all_codon_measures
	-	run_all_gene_plots
        -	analysis for one reference genome (individual gene analysis)
	-	run_family_gene_plots
		-	analysis for gene families based on multiple ref genomes
	-	sample_stats
		-	collect sample/genome mapping statistics produced by samtools idxstats
		-	output: sample_stats.txt (input file for MakeSamplePlots.py

## obsolete code used for pilot
Samples were selected from a local database MGXDB
-	run_crassphage_samples.sh
-	run_diversitools.sh


# old scripts of the phage clustering pipeline internship Bas Dutilh

## extracting phages ##
Phages were extracted using VirSorter from a selection of 34590 bacterial genomes from PATRIC.
https://www.patricbrc.org/

Use the script run_parallel_vs.sh to start 24 jobs of run_vs_1.sh in parallel distributed over two servers.
run_vs_1.sh uses the VirSorter Perl script and is set up in a Conda environment provided by VirSorter.

See
https://github.com/simroux/VirSorter

job_puller, ana_iterations and show_virsorter_summary are old script files, for running on concatenated PATRIC genomes.


## gene annotation ##

* We use prodigal for prediction of genes
* We do a pairwise blastp search of all genes against all genes with evalue cut-off 1e-3
* We filter out all pairwise matches with a > 75% query and target coverage
* we did _not_ filter on bitscore (compare vCONTact bitscore > 50)


## protein clustering ##
* We use mcl for clustering the genes based on the filtered pairwise blastp matches without weight on the edges
* mcl with inflation factor 2.0
* we evaluate the protein clusters by building a hmm profile for every gene cluster and see how well it separates the proteins (todo: specify)
* mafft for multiple alignment of proteins
* hmmbuild for building hmm profile
* hmmsearch

## clustering phages ##
* we cluster on shared gene content
